---
layout: post
date: 2024-09-01
title: Liberating the Data Engineer
excerpt: How Automation and Self-Service Tools Drive Innovation
---

<i> How Automation and Self-Service Tools Drive Innovation</i>

<p>
In the fast-paced world of data engineering, an average data engineer gets bogged down in the repetitive tasks of pipeline maintenance, data wrangling, and responding to ad-hoc data requests. These daily demands often limit the time and energy that data engineers can dedicate to more strategic, innovation-focused work. But what if there was a way to break free from this cycle? By embracing automation and self-service tools, data engineers can be liberated from manual burdens, allowing them to focus on what truly matters—driving innovation, optimizing data infrastructure, and delivering greater value to the business.
</p>

<p> During my summer internship, I got to work on one such project that freed my fellow data engineers from the constant toil of manual triggering, monitoring and data validations on a vital business intelligence process. By introducing automation pipelines and implementing a self-service workflow, we significantly reduced the need for human intervention for deadweight tasks.<p>

<h4>Problem</h4>
<p>There is a critical business process which ingests data from excel sheets, CSVs and MySQL databases as pandas dataframes through a python script. These dataframes are then processed by some bussiness logic defined in an excel sheet and implemented using Python scripts. Finally, the resulting dataset is released to the stakeholders.

Key things to Note:

1. The business logic changes frequently - highly iterative
2. Multiple Python scripts, triggered in a specific order - require involvement of a data engineer to follow through the entire process











